Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
two of our three-part mini-series on
the theme of citizenship and identity.
In part one, in case you missed
it, we talked about the debate and
recent referendum in Italy on who
has the right to Italian citizenship.
In part three, the next episode,
we’ll talk about the battle between
Malta and the European Union over
the right to sell citizenship.
And in today’s episode, we are going
to talk about a recent scandal in
the UK, a scandal involving tens of
thousands of people who thought they
were British, had no reason to doubt
they were British citizens, but then
the government told them they weren’t.
So, let’s not waste a minute,
and get right into it.
You may well have heard the
expression “the sun never
sets on the British Empire”.
At its peak, in 1920, the British
Empire contained 35.5 million square
kilometres of territory, 26% of all
land on Earth, an area 170 times larger
than the size of Great Britain itself.
For better or for worse, at various points
from the 16th century onwards, from the
Caribbean to West Africa, the Middle East
to Australia and the Pacific, the Union
Jack flew high and the local population
were subjects of a British monarch.
One of the many things that this
meant was that, in theory at least,
these subjects shared a common legal
status under the Crown, with the
right to move and work across the
Empire, including Britain itself.
In practice, moving from one British
colony to another was much more difficult.
First, there was the simple fact
that it was incredibly expensive.
Someone from Jamaica or India or Myanmar
couldn’t decide one day, “I think I’ll
try out life in Edinburgh”; the cost
of simply getting there would mean
they couldn’t even entertain the idea.
Second, racial prejudice and
discrimination often blocked their path.
There were restrictions on free
movement, including permissions
or taxes to leave a country.
And even if someone made it to Britain,
especially if they were not white,
they were often met with hostility,
from landlords refusing to rent them
rooms to employers turning them away.
This meant that for the vast majority
of the existence of the British Empire,
free movement within it, and a shared
identity of “Britishness”, was really
a mirage, a nice idea in theory but
in practice it was something enjoyed
by a tiny fraction of the 400 or so
million people that were part of it.
This started to change
after the Second World War.
Britain, the so-called “Mother
country”, had lost half a million
people during the war, had been
badly bombed during the Blitz, and
was in desperate need of rebuilding.
The answer was right in front
of it, or rather, it was in
its many overseas territories.
In 1948, Britain passed a new law creating
a new status — Citizen of the United
Kingdom and Colonies — which confirmed
that people born in British colonies were
legally recognised as British subjects.
This meant that, at least in theory, the
British Prime Minister and a farmer in
rural Pakistan or Jamaica were equals
in terms of their right to hold British
citizenship and live and work in Britain.
And so, in June of 1948, a ship called
the HMT Empire Windrush arrived at
Tilbury Docks, just east of London.
On board were 1,027 passengers,
mostly from Jamaica, coming to Britain
to take up work and help rebuild a
country still recovering from the
devastation of the Second World War.
This arrival is often seen as the symbolic
beginning of what came to be known as
the Windrush generation, named after the
ship itself, the HMT Empire Windrush.
In the years that followed, tens of
thousands more people arrived from
the Caribbean, from countries such as
Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, and others.
Many came in response to advertisements
encouraging Commonwealth citizens to
come and work in Britain, particularly
in sectors where there were severe
labour shortages: public transport,
manufacturing, construction, and the
newly created National Health Service.
And of course, they came not necessarily
out of charity or some patriotic
sense of the need to rebuild Britain;
they came seeking a better life, for
themselves, and for their children.
It’s worth stressing that these people
were not coming as “immigrants” in the
way we might understand that term today.
Legally, they were British
subjects, citizens of the
United Kingdom and Colonies.
Many travelled on British passports,
and under the law at that time, they had
every right to live and work in Britain.
That being said, the welcome they
received was often far from warm.
Many faced open hostility,
discrimination, and racism.
Landlords would refuse to rent to
them, employers would turn them away,
and finding decent housing or stable
work could be a daily struggle.
There was a famous picture taken
of a sign in a window which read,
“No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs.”
Nevertheless, over time, many of
those who arrived settled and built
lives and communities in Britain.
Britain became home, these people, this
“Windrush generation”, contributed to
British society in countless ways: working
in hospitals, driving buses, building
homes, raising families, and leaving their
mark on British culture through music,
food, and traditions from the Caribbean.
And this wasn’t a small number of people.
Between 1948 and 1970, an estimated
half a million people travelled from the
Caribbean to live and work in Britain.
And this was combined with millions of
other immigrants from other countries,
often former British colonies.
By 1971, the foreign-born population of
the United Kingdom reached more than 3
million, 6.4% of the total population.
To state the obvious, this was
a big change, and during this
time, public attitudes towards
immigration started to shift.
Pressure built, particularly from
parts of the British public and
certain politicians, to limit further
immigration from the Commonwealth,
from former colonies that still
maintained close links to Britain.
This culminated with the Immigration
Act in 1971, which introduced the
idea of Indefinite Leave to Remain,
essentially granting permanent residency
to people already in Britain, but
making it clear that future immigration
would be subject to stricter control.
For many of those who had already settled,
this legal shift didn’t affect their
daily lives at the time in the slightest.
They were already living and working
in Britain, some had been doing so
for 20-plus years, and, perfectly
understandably, they assumed they
had every right to continue doing so.
But crucially, many never received formal
documentation to prove their legal status.
They had arrived legally, under the
law at that time, and furthermore,
there was nothing requiring them
to register or carry proof of
their right to be in the country.
They worked, paid their taxes, bought
houses, voted in elections, had
children, and then grandchildren,
and were able to live and exist
like any other British citizen.
Then, in 2012, everything changed.
The British government, under Conservative
leadership, started to roll out a
new policy it called its “hostile
environment policy”, which promised to
clamp down on people who were living
illegally in the United Kingdom.
This was all in response to an election
pledge to reduce immigration and win over
voters from parties like UKIP, which had
an even harsher anti-immigration stance.
The Home Office, which is the British
department responsible for internal
affairs–stuff like immigration, passports,
public safety, and so on–it started to do
things like send trucks around areas with
high immigrant populations with big signs
on telling people that if they are in the
country illegally, they will be deported.
But it wasn’t just about making illegal
immigrants feel uncomfortable in Britain;
the government also introduced a series
of new rules that made it harder for
anyone without clear documentation
to live and work in the country.
Landlords were required to
check the immigration status of
tenants before renting to them.
Banks had to verify a
customer's immigration status
before opening an account.
Employers had to confirm that someone had
the legal right to work in the country.
Even access to healthcare was
restricted if someone couldn’t
prove their legal status.
Essentially, if you didn’t have the
legal right to be in the country, you
were cut off from most major services.
Your ability to exist comfortably,
or even exist at all, was
made an awful lot harder.
For those living in the country illegally,
it was a hostile environment indeed.
Now, this policy enjoyed relatively
high public support at the time.
After all, its intended target was
illegal immigrants, people who didn’t
have a legal right to be in the country.
And the vast majority of immigrants in
the UK, both then and now, are not illegal
immigrants; they are legal immigrants.
They have clear documentation: a
passport or a residence permit.
So when these new rules came in, they
might have been a bit annoying because
you’d have to go and make a photocopy
or update your documents, but they
were little more than a formality.
For many members of the Windrush
generation, however, who had arrived
legally decades earlier but had
never been issued formal papers,
or had any inclination that they
would ever need them, these rules
suddenly became a huge problem.
People who had lived in Britain for fifty
or sixty years were now being asked to
prove that they had the right to be there.
And many…couldn’t.
This “hostile environment” policy
was incredibly hostile indeed.
People were asked to provide documents
such as payslips, utility bills,
or job contracts for every single
year they'd been in the country.
Perfectly understandably, many
people couldn’t do this; they had
thrown away electricity bills from
1963 and hadn’t bothered to keep
their bank statements from 1981.
So they didn’t have any form of
official documentation proving
that they'd been in the country.
To make matters worse, it turned out
that in 2010, two years before the
“hostile environment” policy came into
place, in the name of digitalisation
and efficiency, the Home Office had
destroyed thousands of landing cards,
the paper cards with the names and
dates of people who arrived in the UK.
This was part of a supposedly routine
clean-up of public records, but
for many, it was the last remaining
piece of evidence that they had come
to the UK legally, and therefore
had every right to be there.
And without the right documents, people
found themselves considered to be
illegal immigrants, unwitting victims
of this “hostile environment” policy.
They were unable to work, unable to
rent homes or even evicted from their
home, denied access to healthcare or
benefits, unable to open bank accounts,
or even threatened with deportation.
Some people were detained and
held in immigration centres.
A few were wrongly deported to countries
they had never been to, despite having
spent their entire adult lives in Britain.
The scandal eventually came to
public attention in 2017 and 2018,
when newspapers, campaigners, and
lawyers began to highlight case after
case of people being mistreated.
One widely reported case was that
of a lady called Paulette Wilson.
She had arrived in Britain from Jamaica as
a 10-year-old in 1968, worked for decades
in Britain, raised a family, was a mother
and a grandmother, and even worked in
the House of Commons canteen, cooking for
prime ministers and members of parliament.
In 2016, nearly fifty years after
arriving in Britain, a letter popped
through her door informing her that she'd
broken the law, and she had been found
to be living in the country illegally.
She was told that she needed
to pack her bags and return to
her “home country” of Jamaica.
But Jamaica wasn’t “home”; she left as
a 10-year-old and had never been back.
And to underline, she had come to the
UK completely legally, and up until that
moment, she had no idea that she was
anything other than a British citizen.
She was taken away in a van
to an immigration centre
where she was held for a week.
She was about to be put on a plane
and sent to Jamaica, and were it not
for a last-minute intervention from
her MP, her Member of Parliament, she
would have been deported from Britain.
And she was far from the only case.
As more stories emerged,
public anger grew.
The government was accused of failing
to properly document people’s legal
rights, of creating impossible
demands for proof, and of targeting
people who had every reason to
believe they were British citizens.
And given that the vast majority of
those affected were of Black Caribbean
heritage, there were also questions
raised about structural racism.
The political fallout was swift.
Amber Rudd, who was then the Home
Secretary, resigned in 2018 after
admitting that the Home Office had
set internal targets for deportations.
Theresa May, who was Home Secretary
when the policy was introduced
but had since been made Prime
Minister, issued a public apology.
The government created what it called
the Windrush Compensation Scheme to
try to compensate those affected.
But this too has been heavily criticised.
There were long delays in processing
cases, the application process was
complicated, and even if they were deemed
entitled to compensation, they often
received far less than they expected.
People got payouts of a few hundred or
a few thousand pounds, which might not
sound so bad, but are trivial when you
consider the fact that they were unable
to work or claim unemployment benefits
while their cases were being investigated.
Some died before receiving
any payment at all.
For many observers, the Windrush
scandal became not just a question of
administrative failure or bureaucratic
mistakes, but something much deeper:
a reflection of how Britain struggles
with questions of citizenship,
identity, and its colonial past.
Because at the heart of this scandal is
a simple question: what does it mean to
be British, or indeed from any country?
I am British–I have British citizenship
through both my parents–but I have
lived in Britain for a much lower
percentage of my life compared to many
of the victims of the Windrush scandal.
My kids have never lived in Britain,
and unless they do, they will probably
never consider themselves British,
yet they have British passports.
But people like Paulette Wilson never
considered herself to be anything
other than British, nobody who knew
her would have said she was anything
other than British, yet she found
that her government, or at least
what she had considered to be her
government, decided she was not.
Fortunately, the mistreatment was
so great, and the number of people
affected so large, that this scandal
did not go unnoticed, and the wrongs
have at least been partially righted.
The scandal is an uncomfortable
reminder that even in a country with
long-established legal traditions like
Britain, the gap between who you feel
you are and who the law says you are
can sometimes be dangerously wide.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on The Windrush Scandal.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As a quick reminder, this is part two
of a three-part mini-series on the
theme of citizenship and identity.
In part one, the last episode,
we talked about the question
of what makes an Italian.
And next up, in part three, we will
talk about a different way to become a
citizen: by paying a fat chunk of money,
and one small country’s battle with the
EU for the right to continue doing so.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.